+++
title = "Sinners: What does it mean to be immortal?"
date = 2025-05-13
[taxonomies]
tags=["sinners", "film"]
+++

Recently, I went to the movie theater to see Creed director Ryan Coogler’s
newest film, *Sinners*. When I walked into the theatre, I had little to no
expectations for the movie. I had intentionally been avoiding any information
about the movie online; the only thing I knew about it was that it was a horror
movie. Regardless of how I prepared, what I received was far beyond my
expectations. *Sinners* ended up being one of the most entertaining and
interesting movies I have ever seen, through its beautiful cinematography,
compelling and well-written characters, and amazing score.

*Sinners* is a film deeply layered with metaphors about culture, identity, and
religion. To me, the most interesting point it makes is about immortality and
culture. In the second act of the film, the main character, Samuel, is
performing a song in a local bar. During this song, dancers and musicians from
cultures around the world and all throughout time appear dancing and performing
in the crowd and next to him in spirit. It’s a powerful and visually striking
scene that surprises the viewer, given that the entire story from this point had
been rooted strictly in reality. Not only does this scene serve as a gentle
transition into the absurd vampire horror movie that the film becomes, but it
presents a viewpoint on cultural contribution that, in my opinion, aids in a
larger point about immortality.

In the first post-credit scene, an aged Samuel has become a world famous
musician and is sitting down for a drink at a bar after a performance. He’s
confronted by the now vampiric hosts of two of his former friends. While one
might assume that they’re there to finally finish the job on the last survivor
of their attack, they instead sit down to drink with him and give him a choice:
does he want to be immortal? With little thought, Samuel declines this offer.
The two don’t leave after his answer, but instead ask him to play songs from
when they were all young. This scene made a really strong impression on me,
particularly the juxtaposition and respective irony of the two parties in this
interaction. Samuel is an old man by this point, but from everything the viewer
can gather he is satisfied with his life. He has lived a life rich with
experience, and we see his satisfaction in his lack of panic or reaction at all
upon seeing the two vampires. Sitting across from him are two immortal beings
who will never age and will never feel pain, yet they are still dissatisfied and
reminiscent of the past with their only way to access what they long for being
Samuel’s music. The scene makes us ask the question: who really got the better
deal here?

The yearning for music that drives the vampires to Samuel is not isolated to
this scene. In fact, the film opens with a monologue detailing the existence of
musically talented individuals throughout history and how vampires have always
been attracted by their abilities. However, my interpretation is that the
vampires aren't actually attracted to the music. The irish vampires who attack
the bar are musically proficient. They perform an extremely well-coordinated
musical number, which would be very impressive if I hadn't known that they were
all part of a shared consciousness. If they can perform music themselves, why
are they so attracted to musicians? What really attracts them is the people and
culture that surrounds musicians as they perform. 

A key part of the vampiric myth is that vampires cannot stand in direct sunlight
without bursting into flames, making them creatures of the night. While
immortality is appealing, choosing to become a vampire effectively bars one from
interacting with the world and its people, all in the name of self-preservation.
Based on the post-credit scene and the Irish vampires finding Samuel, we can
clearly see that the vampires, while immortal, still yearn for how they were
able to participate in culture and society when they were alive. Yes, vampires
will live forever, but to what extent are they living? On the other hand, Samuel
will die soon, but he has lived a full life and, most importantly, he has made
significant cultural contributions. No matter how you spin it, culture is what
outlives us, and the only immortality worthwhile is the echoes of our voices in
our culture’s stories, songs, traditions, and art. Samuel’s rejection of literal
immortality is not a surrender of life, but evidence of it. Samuel has chosen a
finite life full of depth, connection, and experience over an eternal existence
lacking all that. Samuel’s music will inspire others and be enjoyed for
decades after he is gone, while the vampires will be alive forever with no
ability to impact others as Samuel did. Ironically, Samuel has achieved
immortality by rejecting it in the first place.

I very often find myself obsessing over death and performing mental gymnastics
in an attempt to overcome it. I think everyone does this to an extent; we all
wish we were immortal from time to time. People find all sorts of ways to cope
with this feeling. For some, the prospect of an afterlife is enough to satiate
them. For others, chasing a life of bliss and hedonism is a sufficient
distraction. Coogler has a different perspective. What *Sinners* shows us is that
if you view yourself as so isolated and important that you would choose the
immortality of a vampire over a lifetime of human experience, in order to
preserve yourself, you’re ignoring your role in the story of your culture and
you will never be satisfied with your life because of that. *Sinners* leaves us
with a comforting thought: immortality is achieved by living well. If we spend
our days obsessing over death, life passes us by. But if we spend our days with
the people we love dancing, making music, living out stories that will be told
for years to come, we become immortal.

Live well.\
-Lucas

